[Music]
and in colorado
it's a fitness test that stands between
the young black-footed ferrets
and a life in the wild
[Music]
it's kind of like sending the kids off
to their first day of school
they have 30 days to prove that they can
live like wild ferrets
if they make the grade they'll go back
to the wild at one of the release sites
program leader paul marinari has a
series of outdoor pens
where the kits and their mums can learn
the basics of life in the wild
so the ferret bus has landed at penn c7
so i'm just gonna place them in here by
one of the burrows
and you have to wonder what's going
through their minds
they spent their first 90 days in a
relatively small cage
and now they come out here and it's like
wow big world
grass wind rain snow
you know coyote in the distance so
it's it's that next step
their mum has been in one of these pens
before and quickly gives her new
accommodation than once over
[Music]
her kits are likely to take more than a
bit of persuading
before they dare step foot into this
brave new world
the mom's trying to get the kids out of
the box and into the burrow
and the kids are trying to get mom from
the burrow into the box
you have to imagine they spent their
first 90 days that's home to them
so it's uh it's that one step out of
that box
it's a totally different world mum has a
total of
five reluctant youngsters to try to coax
out
into an uncertain future any time you
deal with
captive animals you're going to see not
only the births which are very exciting
but also the mortalities they may not
all survive to be released into the wild
so what's on the agenda it's all about
learning to live in burrows and eating
unfamiliar food
and eventually they're going to have to
learn to catch their
own supper in the form of live prairie
[Music]
dogs
while one family starts this 30-day
preparation process
another is finishing theirs so paul's
gonna gather them up
for stage three
we put mom and three kits in this pan
a little more than a month ago so we're
trying to trap them up
uh these three kits are scheduled for
uh reintroduction in new mexico
yep you can see the kit
female kit
it's a little heavy but not too bad and
that chatter they make is just a
agitation chatter that they have
but we'll get them inside and get them
all ready to go
three more ferrets going back to the
wild is great news
but before they can leave for good they
have to go through one more process
first they need two vaccinations one
against canine distemper
and the other against sylvatic plague a
disease fatal to the ferrets
on top of this they get a thorough
health check a dose of antibiotics and a
transponder
all designed to give them the best
possible chance of survival
it's the same thing as a microchip that
you put in dogs and cats
it's just a unique identification number
and we'll just make sure in total 12
kits are going to be released this time
round
today a box in colorado and tomorrow
a new life living wild on the plains of
new mexico
there's a special delivery for the vets
at arcast rescue center
animals find their way here from all
over guatemala
most of them victims of the illegal pet
trade
with over 700 animals of all shapes and
sizes
the center is already at full capacity
but they try to turn no one away
you give me a hand
the latest arrival is just one month old
we've got a baby spider monkey here
given up to the authorities in guatemala
city
they send her up to us
people keeping monkeys upset is sadly
quite common
the only way to get a baby monkey like
her is to kill the mother
and then keep this little baby orphan
in a human environment
alejandro morales has dedicated his life
to saving animals
and trained as a vet so that he could
make a difference
his partner anna bryant is a zoologist
from new zealand
and takes care of all the young orphaned
animals that come
through the door there's a very
traumatic time for them they've been
ripped away from their mother and
they've been stuck in a box or in a car
for
god knows how long so it's for the best
that she's here now
the baby monkey is now at the start of a
five-year journey through the rescue
center
which will culminate with her release
back into the wild
[Music]
after a period in quarantine she will
join up with other rescued spider
monkeys
to form their own troop
[Music]
here she will hopefully find a mate and
go on to rear her own young
eventually her trip will be moved into a
much larger enclosure within the forest
this will be the final stage of the
rehabilitation
[Music]
the dry season is here
now all life converges on the river
herders from far and wide are bringing
their flocks to the last of the water
predators are closing in
with so many animals near the river it's
the best place to get a meal
they aren't welcome here
on the edge of the riverbank a lion has
the ideal vantage point
all the other animals now risk an ambush
on their way to water
in samburu lions are the biggest killers
of baby elephants
harmatan must take extra care of brees
as she leads the winds to the drying
river
the newly exposed sand is a fun place
for breeze and the other young elephants
to play
the activity flushes up insects which in
turn
attract birds
two birds are twice as much fun but
breeze needs to pay attention
with lions around she's vulnerable if
she moves too far from harmatan's side
she's lost
this elephant is not her mother
her panics clear
at last she sees her mother
they're safely reunited but brees must
learn to be careful
my next stop kenya four and a half
thousand miles from london and a world
away from captive breeding
i'm here to meet another animal family
but a family with a difference
just outside nairobi is a david
sheldrick wildlife trust
orphanage and i'm on the milk round
yes you're right they're babies bottles
they're just very
big babies bottles
project manager edwin lucicci wanted to
become a priest
twelve years ago he decided to minister
to an entirely different congregation
look running for breakfast
somebody's hungry so good it's good it's
good it's good
lift the bottle here she's accepted me
yeah
now these are all orphan baby elephants
their mothers have
all died they've either been killed or
died of natural causes so they've some
of them had the most appalling start in
life
but they're safe here
most orphans have lost their mums to
poachers supplying the ivory trade
it's still a huge problem and estimates
put the numbers of adults killed as high
as
4 000 a year
the ambition is not just to keep these
elephants alive it's much greater than
that
the hope is that they can return every
single one of these orphans
to the wild
recovery from the trauma is a long
process
as edwin knows only too well
they saw the mothers being killed
they saw their families being separated
from them
and since elephants were a very strong
memory they will remember that for the
rest of the life
[Music]
it's not enough just to provide the
physical care these babies need
some of them are stressed to an extent
that
they can die they can die just from so
much stress
yes they need protection they need care
they need love
and this is what we provide to them
edwin and his team have to become their
family and earn their trust
in the wild elephants live in family
groups and like our families
they live love and learn surrounded by
others
so the keepers become mum dad auntie
uncle
and most important friends
these babies need 24-hour 365 days a
year
care
and they return that love in spades even
to a visitor
like me
[Music]
i know i should have got a haircut but
i'd rather you didn't get it
please by pulling
the tara and i are establishing
what a strong bond mutara is one of the
youngest orphans here she's just seven
months old
and just like human kids she has her own
security blanket
which also keeps her warm bliss
she's gorgeous but the story of her
early life
is absolutely tragic
mutara was found alone by roadside
in northern kenya she was thought to be
just
seven days old
her mother was probably killed for her
tusks
and she was so weak she wasn't expected
to survive
here she is seven months on perfectly
healthy
loved and cherished
elephants have a similar life expectancy
to us
in the wild babies aren't weaned until
they're around two years old
and until then they rely totally on
mother's milk
but with no mothers around finding the
right sort of milk was a
massive problem and threatened the whole
program as orphanage founder dame daphne
sheldrick told me
i just can't remember how many died in
my can
we tried this milk we tried that milk we
got um
the analysis of elephants milk from zoos
and that and it was high in fat
and then we tried adding butter cream if
that killed them quicker
and then i tried giving them just skim
milk with no
cow's milk fat and they lived longer but
they just wasted away so then i knew it
was a fat
problem and so then i went around
looking for
human baby formulas that had vegetable
oils rather than cow's milk fat
and then we were on the right track 30
years of research and dedication
paid off the success rate with orphans
has soared
and has paid dividends for mutora who
would almost certainly have died but for
the success
of the substitute milk the otter family
have cubs
seeing autocubs in the wild like this is
extremely rare
[Music]
charlie counts six tiny cubs a record
number
making a grand total of 15 family
members
diablo and his mate sophia are certainly
playing their
part in helping to maintain the survival
of giant otters in this part of the
amazon
but so many cups will be quite a handful
the family will certainly have their
work cut out keeping them out of danger
the first thing the cubs need to learn
is how to swim
so this family outing is actually a
swimming lesson
strangely otter cubs don't actually like
water so lessons like this one
are essential
[Music]
there's one cub in particular who
catches the eye
not because he's muddier than the others
but because he really doesn't like the
water
[Music]
despite mum's best efforts all he wants
to do
is get back to the warmth and security
of the den
[Music]
the other cubs all seem to be enduring
their swimming lesson
some even look like they're starting to
get the hang of it
but this little cub's just not having it
so in the end
there's nothing for it but to just pick
him up
and dunk him in the water
[Music]
as cubs all of the otters here are given
names
to help any scientist studying them it
seems fitting
to give this cub a name appropriate to
lake salvador
so charlie calls him darling
even with the protection of a big family
the early months of a cub's life can be
the most
perilous learning to swim is just the
first danger to overcome
[Music]
only around a third of all these giant
otter cubs
will make it to adulthood
[Music]
at this age the cubs tire easily
so it's not long before their swimming
lesson is over
and they're taken back to the warmth and
safety of the den
[Music]
[Applause]
foreign